---
title: 2.
order: 20
---

We are not the first to cover this ground. In his 1995 book *Reimagining Thoreau*, Milder, just quoted, makes extensive use of Ronald Clapper's 1967 PhD dissertation, *The Development of "Walden": A Genetic Text*, in an effort to understand various aspects of *Walden* by tracing Thoreau's revisions across the work's seven extant draft versions contained in HM 924, the manuscript of *Walden* at the Huntington Library. Milder writes at length about Thoreau's revisions to "Higher Laws" in particular. He notes that most of the material that would become "Higher Laws" enters *Walden* beginning in the fourth or "D" draft, following the period from 1849 to 1852 in which Thoreau, who had completed his first draft while living at the pond, pulled back from consistently active work on the manuscript. Whereas the germ of "Higher Laws" in Thoreau's "A" draft of 1846–1847 is, in Milder's words, "unequivocally triumphant," the published chapter of 1854, having passed through Thoreau's subsequent drafts, is "tortuous" and even "schizophrenic" in its logic, enacting a "dramatic self-deconstruction." It is only from D forward, Milder shows, that Thoreau pursues the line of thought in "Higher Laws" that centers notions of purity and chastity, betraying an awkward discomfort with his own animal urges—sexual urges in particular, Milder maintains, reading the chapter's emphasis on diet as a metaphor thinly veiled to us, if not to its author. Milder seeks an explanation for these changes in Thoreau's personal struggles of 1852–1853, as documented in the Journal, and in what evidence we have of Thoreau's attitudes towards human sexuality, such as his September, 1852 letter to H.G.O. Blake, published in the Princeton Edition volume *Early Essays and Miscellanies* as "Chastity &amp; Sensuality."

Our interest at present is not to assess Milder's reading of Thoreau's motivations, conscious or otherwise, for revising "Higher Laws" but simply to show you where you can find the evidence of revision in the manuscript itself, so that you can reach your own conclusions, at least with respect to where and how Thoreau shaped his material. That said, we do agree with Milder's broad conclusion that the "Higher Laws" material in "A" reads very differently in its original context and its context from "D" forward; and as we take you through this portion of the manuscript, we will explain why.

We have one other interest as well. Thoreau's revisions to "Higher Laws" represent an excellent case study in the value of consulting the digitized manuscript of *Walden* itself, rather than relying entirely on attempts to model Thoreau's revisions such as Clapper's 1967 dissertation or our own digital re-casting of the dissertation, *Walden: A Fluid-Text Edition*, available at digitalthoreau.org. As valuable as such models can be for re-constructing the phases of the manuscript's conceptual development—we might even channel Chanticleer and crow that they are *invaluable* starting points for understanding Thoreau's process of revision—being models, they are unavoidably imperfect. For all that they reveal, they occasionally conceal. In the case we want to show you, they are limited by a methodology that arranges Thoreau's material across all seven drafts by the order of that material in the published *Walden*. As a result, passages that lie cheek by jowl at some places in the manuscript end up separated from one another in the model.

With all this in mind, let's turn now to the manuscript. <!-- You can use the QR code or the URL on the screen to access all the images we'll be discussing, together with the full text of this presentation. -->

We'll focus mainly on manuscript pages that belong to the "A" draft of *Walden*. These pages contain material that in the published *Walden* land variously in "The Village," "The Ponds," "Higher Laws," "Baker Farm," and "Brute Neighbors." It's important to understand that there are no chapter divisions in Thoreau's first draft of *Walden*; the stretch of writing on these pages represents a more or less continuous whole that, across subsequent drafts, comes to be broken up and distributed into the chapters that finally organize the published work. "More or less" continuous some pages in this sequence are missing.

---