---
title: 4.
order: 40
---

In A, it is immediately following this last description that we get the first material that would ultimately, much revised, appear in "Higher Laws." "The main reason and inducement to fish was that it introduced me to the night and detained me there," Thoreau writes, beginning a new paragraph. These are the last lines on the page, and they are canceled. At the top of the next page, we read, 

{% include essay/feature/blockquote.html
   quote="Fishermen and hunters see nature at an advantage which the philosopher never enjoys. They go through the fields with freedom and abandonment – not formally, and see nature as it were without looking at her, in a deshabille, as members of her family." %}

Thoreau re-works this material several pages later, following material that he would eventually apportion to "The Ponds" and "Baker Farm." We will see what he does with it in a moment. For now, what is important to note is that Thoreau's entrée into the "Higher Laws" material is by means of a contrast between fishermen and hunters on the one hand, and philosophers on the other, that it immediately follows his parable of being brought back to earth from his wandering dreams, and re-linked to Nature, by the jerk of his fishing line, and that this description of the fisher/hunter relationship to nature, with its emphasis on freedom and abandonment, is continuous with the rhetoric of bolting and escaping from environments of culture (the village) and cultivation (the bean-field) to spaces where he is free to ramble and commune with owls and foxes.  

This continuity is lost when, beginning with the D draft, the "Higher Laws" material is separated from the material in "The Bean-Field" and "The Village." As we'll see, fishing and hunting will take on a somewhat different aspect once the "Higher Laws" material begins to shape up as its own chapter. \[Note: The D material begins with 11b and follows a missing leaf. \] Equally important, the continuity is difficult to discern in either Clapper's dissertation or the fluid-text edition of *Walden*, where, as previously mentioned, material is displayed only where it landed in the published version.

Returning to A, we find, following the canceled sentences about "Fishermen and hunters," material that would end up in paragraphs 5–8 of "The Ponds," emphasizing, among other things, the purity and transparency of the water in Walden Pond. Three leaves are missing between this material and what follows: material that would land in "Baker Farm" paragraphs 5, 6, and 8. Beginning at the bottom or one page, and continuing onto the next, he writes: 

{% include essay/feature/blockquote.html
   quote="As I ran down the hill to the pond – with the rain-bow over my shoulder – and some slight tinkling sounds borne to my ear through the cleansed air – from I know not what quarter, I said to myself – why not live always a rude and frontier life – full of adventures of hard work – learn much - though it be only through these woods &amp; fields! There is no other country than this – here is the field and the man. The daily boundaries of life are expanded &amp; dispersed and I see in what field I stand. Roam far and wide – grasp at life and conquer it. Learn much and live. You are really free – stay till late in the night – be unwise and daring. \[note: images 200-201\]" %}

"My haste to catch pickerel wading in retired meadows in sloughs and bog holes in forlorn &amp; savage places seemed for an instant trivial to me who had been sent to school &amp; college. "

--- 
